# Announce: Rakudo Star Release 2016.03

## A useful and usable production distribution of Perl 6

On behalf of the Rakudo and Perl 6 development teams, I'm honored to announce
the March 2016 release of "Rakudo Star", a useful and usable production
distribution of Perl 6. The tarball for the March 2016 release is available
from <http://rakudo.org/downloads/star/>.

This is the second post-Christmas (production) release of Rakudo Star and
implements Perl v6.c. It comes with support for the MoarVM backend (all module
tests pass on supported platforms).

Please note that this release of Rakudo Star is not fully functional with the
JVM backend from the Rakudo compiler. Please use the MoarVM backend only.

In the Perl 6 world, we make a distinction between the language ("Perl 6") and
specific implementations of the language such as "Rakudo Perl". This Star
release includes [release 2016.03] of the [Rakudo Perl 6 compiler], version
2016.03 of [MoarVM], plus various modules, documentation, and other resources
collected from the Perl 6 community.

[release 2016.03]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rakudo/rakudo/2016.03/docs/announce/2016.03.md
[Rakudo Perl 6 compiler]: http://github.com/rakudo/rakudo
[MoarVM]: http://moarvm.org/

Some of the new compiler features since the last Rakudo Star release include:

  * Much improved REPL with multi-line support.
  * Native string arrays.
  * Values in the environment value hash are now allomorphic.
  * Blob is now a proper value type.
  * Many Time & Memory efficiency improvements including faster accessor/mutators.
  * Can now uninstall modules.
  * Modules can now be shared between rakudo versions.
  * The usual assortment of bug fixes and error message improvements.

Notable changes in modules shipped with Rakudo Star:

  * Bailador: removed and available in the ecosystem. 
  * ufo: removed and available in the ecosystem.
  * Native::Resources: helper for native code added.
  * DBIish: Better Oracle & Postgres support, more GLRish API and many other fixes.
  * Shell::Command: deprecated "which".
  * Panda: Fix issues with paths containing spaces, '--help' option added etc.
  * And much more

There are some key features of Perl 6 that Rakudo Star does not yet
handle appropriately, although they will appear in upcoming releases.
Some of the not-quite-there features include:

  * advanced macros
  * non-blocking I/O (in progress)
  * some bits of Synopsis 9 and 11

There is an online resource at <http://perl6.org/compilers/features>
that lists the known implemented and missing features of Rakudo's
backends and other Perl 6 implementations.

In many places we've tried to make Rakudo smart enough to inform the
programmer that a given feature isn't implemented, but there are many
that we've missed. Bug reports about missing and broken features are
welcomed at <rakudobug@perl.org>.

See <http://perl6.org/> for links to much more information about
Perl 6, including documentation, example code, tutorials, presentations,
reference materials, design documents, and other supporting resources.
Some Perl 6 tutorials are available under the "docs" directory in
the release tarball.

The development team thanks all of the contributors and sponsors for
making Rakudo Star possible. If you would like to contribute, see
<http://rakudo.org/how-to-help>, ask on the <perl6-compiler@perl.org>
mailing list, or join us on IRC \#perl6 on freenode.
