# Announce: Rakudo Star Release 2017.07

## A useful and usable production distribution of Perl 6

On behalf of the Rakudo and Perl 6 development teams, I'm pleased to
announce the July 2017 release of "Rakudo Star", a useful and usable
production distribution of Perl 6. The tarball for the July 2017 release
is available from <https://rakudo.perl6.org/downloads/star/>.

Binaries for macOS and Windows (64 bit) are also available.

This is the eighth post-Christmas (production) release of Rakudo Star and
implements Perl v6.c. It comes with support for the MoarVM backend (all module
tests pass on supported platforms).

IMPORTANT: "panda" is to be removed very shortly since it is deprecated.
Please use "zef" instead.

Currently, Star is on a quarterly release cycle and 2017.10 (October) will
follow later this year.

Please note that this release of Rakudo Star is not fully functional with the
JVM backend from the Rakudo compiler. Please use the MoarVM backend only.

In the Perl 6 world, we make a distinction between the language ("Perl 6") and
specific implementations of the language such as "Rakudo Perl".

This Star release includes [release 2017.07] of the [Rakudo Perl 6 compiler],
version 2017.07 [MoarVM], plus various modules, documentation, and other
resources collected from the Perl 6 community.

[release 2017.07]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rakudo/rakudo/2017.07/docs/announce/2017.07.md
[Rakudo Perl 6 compiler]: http://github.com/rakudo/rakudo
[MoarVM]: http://moarvm.org/

The Rakudo compiler changes since the last Rakudo Star release of 2017.01 are
now listed in "2017.05.md", "2017.06.md" and "2017.07.md" under the
"rakudo/docs/announce" directory of the source distribution.

Notable changes in modules shipped with Rakudo Star:

    + DBIish: Doc and CI updates
    + doc: Too many to list. p6doc fixed.
    + grammar-debugger: Works again now.
    + p6-io-string: New dep for doc.
    + p6-native-resources: Removed since deprecated and not used by linenoise.
    + panda: Officially deprecate panda in favour of zef.
    + perl6-Test-When: New dep for perl6-pod-to-bigpage.
    + perl6-lwp-simple: Fix breakage due to rakudo encoding refactor.
    + tap-harness6: Replaces deprecated tap-harness6-prove6.
    + zef: Too many to list.

There are some key features of Perl 6 that Rakudo Star does not yet
handle appropriately, although they will appear in upcoming releases.
Some of the not-quite-there features include:

  * advanced macros
  * non-blocking I/O (in progress)
  * some bits of Synopsis 9 and 11

There is an online resource at <http://perl6.org/compilers/features>
that lists the known implemented and missing features of Rakudo's
backends and other Perl 6 implementations.

In many places we've tried to make Rakudo smart enough to inform the
programmer that a given feature isn't implemented, but there are many
that we've missed. Bug reports about missing and broken features are
welcomed at <rakudobug@perl.org>.

See <https://perl6.org/> for links to much more information about
Perl 6, including documentation, example code, tutorials, presentations,
reference materials, design documents, and other supporting resources.
Some Perl 6 tutorials are available under the "docs" directory in
the release tarball.

The development team thanks all of the contributors and sponsors for
making Rakudo Star possible. If you would like to contribute, see
<http://rakudo.org/how-to-help>, ask on the <perl6-compiler@perl.org>
mailing list, or join us on IRC \#perl6 on freenode.
