# Announce: Rakudo Star Release 2018.04

## A useful and usable production distribution of Rakudo Perl 6

On behalf of the Rakudo and Perl 6 development teams, I'm pleased to announce
the April 2018 release of "Rakudo Star", a useful and usable production
distribution of Rakudo Perl 6.  The tarball for this release is available from
<https://rakudo.perl6.org/downloads/star/>.  

Binaries for macOS and Windows (64 bit) are also available at the same
location.

This is a post-Christmas (production) release of Rakudo Star and implements
Perl v6.c. It comes with support for the MoarVM backend (all module tests pass
on supported platforms).  Currently, Star is on a quarterly release cycle. 

Please note that this release of Rakudo Star is not fully functional with the
JVM backend from the Rakudo compiler. Please use the MoarVM backend only.

In the Perl 6 world, we make a distinction between the language ("Perl 6") and
specific implementations of the language such as "Rakudo Perl 6".

This Star release includes [release 2018.04] of the [Rakudo Perl 6 compiler],
version 2018.04 [MoarVM], plus various modules, documentation, and other
resources collected from the Perl 6 community.

[release 2018.04]: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rakudo/rakudo/2018.04/docs/announce/2018.04.md
[Rakudo Perl 6 compiler]: http://github.com/rakudo/rakudo
[MoarVM]: http://moarvm.org/

The Rakudo compiler changes since the last Rakudo Star release of 2017.10 are
now listed in "2018.02.md", "2018.03.md", and "2018.04.md" under the
"rakudo/docs/announce" directory of the source distribution.

Important Rakudo bug fixes are now listed at 
[Perl 6 Alerts]: https://alerts.perl6.org/

Deprecation:

    + "panda" has been removed from releases after 2017.10 since it is
deprecated.  Please use "zef".
    + LWP::Simple is deprecated and will be removed. Please use "HTTP::UserAgent".

Notable changes in modules shipped with Rakudo Star:

    + datetime-parse: Update asctime parsing
    + doc: Too many to list including jjmerelo TPF Grant Work.
    + http-useragent: Pre-allocate a buffer when getting content
    + json\_fast: Unescape fixes.
    + jsonrpc: LWP::Simple replaced with HTTP::UserAgent.
    + svg-plot: Fix xy-line plot closing over some variables it shouldn't.
    + zef: version 0.2.8

There are some key features of Perl 6 that Rakudo Star does not yet
handle appropriately, although they will appear in upcoming releases.
Some of the not-quite-there features include:

  * advanced macros
  * some bits of Synopsis 9 and 11

There is an online resource at <http://perl6.org/compilers/features>
that lists the known implemented and missing features of Rakudo's
backends and other Perl 6 implementations.

In many places we've tried to make Rakudo smart enough to inform the
programmer that a given feature isn't implemented, but there are many
that we've missed. Bug reports about missing and broken features are
welcomed at <rakudobug@perl.org>.

See <https://perl6.org/> for links to much more information about
Perl 6, including documentation, example code, tutorials, presentations,
reference materials, design documents, and other supporting resources.
Some Perl 6 tutorials are available under the "docs" directory in
the release tarball.

The development team thanks all of the contributors and sponsors for
making Rakudo Star possible. If you would like to contribute, see
<http://rakudo.org/how-to-help>, ask on the <perl6-compiler@perl.org>
mailing list, or join us on IRC \#perl6 on freenode.
